---
title: "Codebook.md"
author: "DRD"
date: "2023-12-10"
output: html_document
---

The data utilized in this assignment were generated by researchers attempting to measure the forces exerted on a cellphone by subjects performing certain activities. The researchers had subjects wear a cellphone and perform six different activities (walking, walking upstairs, walking downstairs, sitting, standing still, and laying down) and repeatedly measured the forces associated with each activity over time using instruments within the cellphone, including an accelerometer and a gyroscope. The parameters measured included:

tBodyAcc-XYZ
tGravityAcc-XYZ
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ
tBodyGyro-XYZ
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ
tBodyAccMag
tGravityAccMag
tBodyAccJerkMag
tBodyGyroMag
tBodyGyroJerkMag
fBodyAcc-XYZ
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ
fBodyGyro-XYZ
fBodyAccMag
fBodyAccJerkMag
fBodyGyroMag
fBodyGyroJerkMag

Note: Parameters followed by "-XYZ" indicate three speparate parameters that were measured in the X, Y, and Z directions, while parameters preceded by an "f" had a fast Fourier transform applied. While the raw values from the accelerometer and gyroscope had standard gravity units (g) and radians/second for units, the values reported in the files were normalized, and therefore unitless.

For each measurement, a mean and standard deviation were taken. While other variables were calculated and other parameters measured, they were outside the scope of this assignment and therefore not detailed here.

First, the researchers converted the human-readable activity labels into a numeric code, outlined in the "activity_labels.txt" document. The data associated with the subjects was then split into two groups: a test group containing 30% of the subjects and a training group containing the other 70%. For each group, the raw numerical values associated with each calculated value were saved in a text document ("X_test.txt" and "X_train.txt") respectively. The corresponding subject id numbers were then saved to separate text files, as were the corresponding nuemric activity codes.

The tidy dataset generated by the script "run_analysis.R" contains 68 columns. The first corresponds the the subject number, the second corresponds to the activity, and the remaining 66 correspond to the mean and standard deviation of each of the 33 parameters outlined above. Each row therefore corresponds to a single subject/activity combination (180 rows from the 6 activities times 30 subject) For each subject and activity combination, the mean of all included values was calculated (each value in the tidy set is the mean of a set of means or standard deviations).